docs: JOSS paper (#337)
scikit-hep/pylhe: paper/paper.md

---
title: "pylhe: A Lightweight Python interface to read Les Houches Event files"
tags:
  - python
  - high energy physics
authors:
  - name: Matthew Feickert
    orcid: 0000-0003-4124-7862
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Lukas Heinrich
    orcid: 0000-0002-4048-7584
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Eduardo Rodrigues
    orcid: 0000-0003-2846-7625
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: 3

>   - name: Alexander Puck Neuwirth

Reviewer: Indeed, that's how it ends up working in the render.

Example: https://github.com/scikit-hep/pyhf/blob/bc66d82e180f804324fcd7f40fbe9085a29f6a28/docs/JOSS/paper.md?plain=1#L10-L22 -> [![DOI](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.02823/status.svg)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02823)

---

> title: "pylhe: A Lightweight Python interface to Les Houches Event files"

Author: Since I like this more I changed the readme title now.

tags:
  - Python
  - physics
  - high energy physics
authors:
  - name: Alexander Puck Neuwirth^[Corresponding author.]
    orcid: 0000-0002-2484-1328
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Matthew Feickert
    orcid: 0000-0003-4124-7862
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Lukas Heinrich
    orcid: 0000-0002-4048-7584

>     affiliation: 4

Author: I also requested a review by @lukasheinrich since he is listed as author too.

Reviewer 2: In any case I reckon you can proceed with 3 good-to-go :).

  - name: Eduardo Rodrigues
    orcid: 0000-0003-2846-7625
    affiliation: 5

affiliations:
  - name: University of Milan Bicocca
    index: 1
  - name: INFN Milan Bicocca
    index: 2
  - name: University of Wisconsin-Madison
    index: 3
  - name: Technical University of Munich
    index: 4
  - name: University of Liverpool
    index: 5

date: 26 November 2025 # APN TODO: update date
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Historically, the first standards for event representation in high-energy physics were the HEPEVT and HEPRUP common blocks [@Boos:2001cv], which provided a Fortran-based structure for storing event information.
As the complexity of Monte Carlo event generators increased, the need for a more flexible and extensible format led to the development of the Les Houches Event (LHE) file format [@Alwall:2006yp].
LHE introduced an XML structure that allowed for better organization of event data and facilitated interoperability between different tools.

> Typically, LHE files are used to describe parton-level events generated by matrix element generators that are passed to parton shower and hadronization programs producing HepMC files [@Dobbs:2001ck;@Verbytskyi:2020sus;@hans_dembinski_2022_7013498] or directly to analysis frameworks like Rivet [@Buckley:2010ar;@Bierlich:2019rhm;@Bierlich:2024vqo].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Typically, LHE files are used to describe parton-level events generated by matrix element generators that are passed to parton shower and hadronization programs producing HepMC files [@Dobbs:2001ck;@Verbytskyi:2020sus;@hans_dembinski_2022_7013498], or directly to analysis frameworks such as Rivet [@Buckley:2010ar;@Bierlich:2019rhm;@Bierlich:2024vqo].
```
